README.rst, before:

.. image:: https://travis-ci.org/cs01/pygdbmi.svg?branch=master
  :target: https://travis-ci.org/cs01/pygdbmi

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/pypi-v0.7.4.2-blue.svg
  :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygdbmi/

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/python-2.7,3.3,3.4,3.5,3.6 pypy-blue.svg
  :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygdbmi/

pygdbmi - Get Structured Output from GDB's Machine Interface
============================================================

`API Documentation <http://grassfedcode.com/pygdbmi/>`_

Parse gdb machine interface string output and return structured data
types (Python dicts) that are JSON serializable. Useful for writing the
backend to a gdb frontend. For example,
`gdbgui <https://github.com/cs01/gdbgui>`__ uses pygdbmi on the backend.

Also implements a class to control gdb, ``GdbController``, which allows
programmatic control of gdb using Python, which is also useful if
creating a front end.

To get `machine
interface <https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI.html>`_
output from gdb, run gdb with the ``--interpreter=mi2`` flag.

Installation
------------

::

    pip install pygdbmi

Compatibility
-------------

Operating Systems
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Ubuntu 14.04+

macOS
Note: macOS users must also codesign gdb. Follow [these
instructions](http://andresabino.com/2015/04/14/codesign-gdb-on-mac-os-x-yosemite-10-10-2/). This will fix the error
`please check gdb is codesigned - see taskgated(8)`.

gdb versions
^^^^^^^^^^^^

gdb 7.7+

Examples
--------

gdb mi defines a syntax for its output that is suitable for machine readability and scripting: `example
output <https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI-Simple-Examples.html#GDB_002fMI-Simple-Examples>`__:

::

     -> -break-insert main
     <- ^done,bkpt={number="1",type="breakpoint",disp="keep",
         enabled="y",addr="0x08048564",func="main",file="myprog.c",
         fullname="/home/myprog.c",line="68",thread-groups=["i1"],
         times="0"}
     <- (gdb)

Use ``pygdbmi.gdbmiparser.parse_response`` to turn that string output
into a JSON serializable dictionary

::

    from pygdbmi import gdbmiparser
    from pprint import pprint
    response = gdbmiparser.parse_response('^done,bkpt={number="1",type="breakpoint",disp="keep", enabled="y",addr="0x08048564",func="main",file="myprog.c",fullname="/home/myprog.c",line="68",thread-groups=["i1"],times="0"')
    pprint(response)
    > {'message': 'done',
     'payload': {'bkpt': {'addr': '0x08048564',
                          'disp': 'keep',
                          'enabled': 'y',
                          'file': 'myprog.c',
                          'fullname': '/home/myprog.c',
                          'func': 'main',
                          'line': '68',
                          'number': '1',
                          'thread-groups': ['i1'],
                          'times': '0',
                          'type': 'breakpoint'}},
     'type': 'result'}

Programmatic Control Over gdb
-----------------------------

But how do you get the gdb output into Python in the first place? If you
want, ``pygdbmi`` also has a class to control gdb as subprocess. You can
write commands, and get structured output back:

::

    from pygdbmi.gdbcontroller import GdbController
    from pprint import pprint

    # Start gdb process
    gdbmi = GdbController()

    # Load binary a.out and get structured response
    response = gdbmi.write('-file-exec-file a.out')
    pprint(response)
    [{'message': u'thread-group-added',
      'payload': {u'id': u'i1'},
      'type': 'notify'},
     {'message': u'done', 'payload': None, 'type': 'result'}]

Now do whatever you want with gdb. All gdb commands, as well as gdb
`machine interface
commands <(https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI-Input-Syntax.html#GDB_002fMI-Input-Syntax)>`__
are acceptable. gdb mi commands give better structured output that is
machine readable, rather than gdb console output. mi commands begin with
a ``-``.

::

    response = gdbmi.write('-break-insert main')
    response = gdbmi.write('break main')
    response = gdbmi.write('-exec-run')
    response = gdbmi.write('run')  # normal gdb command is okay too
    response = gdbmi.write('-exec-next')
    response = gdbmi.write('next')
    response = gdbmi.write('-exec-continue')
    response = gdbmi.write('continue')
    response = gdbmi.exit()


Parsed Output Description
-------------------------

Each parsed gdb response consists of a list of dictionaries. Each
dictionary has keys ``message``, ``payload``, ``token``, and ``type``.

-  ``message`` contains a textual message from gdb, which is not always
   present. When missing, this is ``None``.

-  ``payload`` contains the content of gdb's output, which can contain
   any of the following: ``dictionary``, ``list``, ``string``. This too
   is not always present, and can be ``None`` depending on the response.

-  ``token`` If an input command was prefixed with a (optional) token then the corresponding output for that command will also be prefixed by that same token. This field is only present for pygdbmi output types ``nofity`` and ``result``. When missing, this is ``None``.

The ``type`` is defined based on gdb's various `mi output record
types <(https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI-Output-Records.html#GDB_002fMI-Output-Records)>`__,
and can be

-  result - the result of a gdb command, such as ``done``, ``running``,
   ``error``, etc.
-  notify - additional async changes that have occurred, such as
   breakpoint modified
-  console - textual responses to cli commands
-  log - debugging messages from gdb's internals
-  output - output from target
-  target - output from remote target
-  done - when gdb has finished its output

Contributing
------------

Set up a new virtual environment, then clone this repo and run
``pip install -r requirements.txt`` and ``pip install -r dev_requirements.txt``.

Confirm unit tests are working with
``make test``, then begin development.

Update unit tests as necessary at ``pygdbmi/tests/test\_app.py``.



Projects Using pygdbmi
----------------------

-  `gdbgui <https://github.com/cs01/gdbgui>`__ implements a
   browser-based frontend to gdb, using pygdbmi on the backend
-  `PINCE <https://github.com/korcankaraokcu/PINCE>`__ is a
   gdb frontend that aims to provide a reverse engineering tool
   and a reusable library focused on games. It uses pygdbmi to
   parse gdb/mi based output for some functions
- Know of another project? Create a PR and add it here.

Commit message:

Added avatar2 in the pygdbmi showcase (#20)

README.rst, after:

.. image:: https://travis-ci.org/cs01/pygdbmi.svg?branch=master
  :target: https://travis-ci.org/cs01/pygdbmi

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/pypi-v0.7.4.2-blue.svg
  :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygdbmi/

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/python-2.7,3.3,3.4,3.5,3.6 pypy-blue.svg
  :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygdbmi/

pygdbmi - Get Structured Output from GDB's Machine Interface
============================================================

`API Documentation <http://grassfedcode.com/pygdbmi/>`_

Parse gdb machine interface string output and return structured data
types (Python dicts) that are JSON serializable. Useful for writing the
backend to a gdb frontend. For example,
`gdbgui <https://github.com/cs01/gdbgui>`__ uses pygdbmi on the backend.

Also implements a class to control gdb, ``GdbController``, which allows
programmatic control of gdb using Python, which is also useful if
creating a front end.

To get `machine
interface <https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI.html>`_
output from gdb, run gdb with the ``--interpreter=mi2`` flag.

Installation
------------

::

    pip install pygdbmi

Compatibility
-------------

Operating Systems
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Ubuntu 14.04+

macOS
Note: macOS users must also codesign gdb. Follow [these
instructions](http://andresabino.com/2015/04/14/codesign-gdb-on-mac-os-x-yosemite-10-10-2/). This will fix the error
`please check gdb is codesigned - see taskgated(8)`.

gdb versions
^^^^^^^^^^^^

gdb 7.7+

Examples
--------

gdb mi defines a syntax for its output that is suitable for machine readability and scripting: `example
output <https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI-Simple-Examples.html#GDB_002fMI-Simple-Examples>`__:

::

     -> -break-insert main
     <- ^done,bkpt={number="1",type="breakpoint",disp="keep",
         enabled="y",addr="0x08048564",func="main",file="myprog.c",
         fullname="/home/myprog.c",line="68",thread-groups=["i1"],
         times="0"}
     <- (gdb)

Use ``pygdbmi.gdbmiparser.parse_response`` to turn that string output
into a JSON serializable dictionary

::

    from pygdbmi import gdbmiparser
    from pprint import pprint
    response = gdbmiparser.parse_response('^done,bkpt={number="1",type="breakpoint",disp="keep", enabled="y",addr="0x08048564",func="main",file="myprog.c",fullname="/home/myprog.c",line="68",thread-groups=["i1"],times="0"')
    pprint(response)
    > {'message': 'done',
     'payload': {'bkpt': {'addr': '0x08048564',
                          'disp': 'keep',
                          'enabled': 'y',
                          'file': 'myprog.c',
                          'fullname': '/home/myprog.c',
                          'func': 'main',
                          'line': '68',
                          'number': '1',
                          'thread-groups': ['i1'],
                          'times': '0',
                          'type': 'breakpoint'}},
     'type': 'result'}

Programmatic Control Over gdb
-----------------------------

But how do you get the gdb output into Python in the first place? If you
want, ``pygdbmi`` also has a class to control gdb as subprocess. You can
write commands, and get structured output back:

::

    from pygdbmi.gdbcontroller import GdbController
    from pprint import pprint

    # Start gdb process
    gdbmi = GdbController()

    # Load binary a.out and get structured response
    response = gdbmi.write('-file-exec-file a.out')
    pprint(response)
    [{'message': u'thread-group-added',
      'payload': {u'id': u'i1'},
      'type': 'notify'},
     {'message': u'done', 'payload': None, 'type': 'result'}]

Now do whatever you want with gdb. All gdb commands, as well as gdb
`machine interface
commands <(https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI-Input-Syntax.html#GDB_002fMI-Input-Syntax)>`__
are acceptable. gdb mi commands give better structured output that is
machine readable, rather than gdb console output. mi commands begin with
a ``-``.

::

    response = gdbmi.write('-break-insert main')
    response = gdbmi.write('break main')
    response = gdbmi.write('-exec-run')
    response = gdbmi.write('run')  # normal gdb command is okay too
    response = gdbmi.write('-exec-next')
    response = gdbmi.write('next')
    response = gdbmi.write('-exec-continue')
    response = gdbmi.write('continue')
    response = gdbmi.exit()


Parsed Output Description
-------------------------

Each parsed gdb response consists of a list of dictionaries. Each
dictionary has keys ``message``, ``payload``, ``token``, and ``type``.

-  ``message`` contains a textual message from gdb, which is not always
   present. When missing, this is ``None``.

-  ``payload`` contains the content of gdb's output, which can contain
   any of the following: ``dictionary``, ``list``, ``string``. This too
   is not always present, and can be ``None`` depending on the response.

-  ``token`` If an input command was prefixed with a (optional) token then the corresponding output for that command will also be prefixed by that same token. This field is only present for pygdbmi output types ``nofity`` and ``result``. When missing, this is ``None``.

The ``type`` is defined based on gdb's various `mi output record
types <(https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/GDB_002fMI-Output-Records.html#GDB_002fMI-Output-Records)>`__,
and can be

-  result - the result of a gdb command, such as ``done``, ``running``,
   ``error``, etc.
-  notify - additional async changes that have occurred, such as
   breakpoint modified
-  console - textual responses to cli commands
-  log - debugging messages from gdb's internals
-  output - output from target
-  target - output from remote target
-  done - when gdb has finished its output

Contributing
------------

Set up a new virtual environment, then clone this repo and run
``pip install -r requirements.txt`` and ``pip install -r dev_requirements.txt``.

Confirm unit tests are working with
``make test``, then begin development.

Update unit tests as necessary at ``pygdbmi/tests/test\_app.py``.



Projects Using pygdbmi
----------------------

-  `gdbgui <https://github.com/cs01/gdbgui>`__ implements a
   browser-based frontend to gdb, using pygdbmi on the backend
-  `PINCE <https://github.com/korcankaraokcu/PINCE>`__ is a
   gdb frontend that aims to provide a reverse engineering tool
   and a reusable library focused on games. It uses pygdbmi to
   parse gdb/mi based output for some functions
-  `avatar² <https://github.com/avatartwo/avatar2>`__ is an orchestration
   framework for reversing and analysing firmware of embedded devices.
   It utilizes pygdbmi for internal communication to different analysis
   targets.
- Know of another project? Create a PR and add it here.
